Few things in life are free. Merchants sell goods and services and in
exchange, consumers provide payments; this has been the system
in place since cattle was the currency of choice. While the basic
foundation of financial exchange remains the same, the payment
world has evolved significantly. Payment processing refers to the
automated processing of electronic payment transactions between
merchants and consumers.
To survive and thrive business owners must continuously adapt,
but the ever-evolving landscape of the payment industry can seem
complex and confusing. Payment Processing 101 provides you with
a comprehensive overview of everything you need to know about
payment processing.
This eBook guides you through the oft-complex terrain that is the
payment industry, exploring the way the landscape is changing,
the details that facilitate payment processing, and how payment
processing can help grow your business. 
CASH AND CHECKS ARE DECREASING
We live in the age of speed, convenience, and minimalism; increasingly fewer people are using cash
and checks. A recent report found that only 11% of consumers used cash in a day, compared to 27%
the previous year, and more than 29% hadn’t used cash in a week or more. One major contributing
factor leading to the decline of cash is the increase of online shopping; eMarketer projects that online
payments as a percentage of overall global retail sales is expected to increase from 7.3% this year to
12.4% in 2019.
Checks are antiquated and outdated; the use of checks has dropped even more dramatically than
cash. Not only are fewer consumers using checks, but fewer merchants are accepting them due to
high operational costs, additional paperwork, and NSF (non-sufficient funds) checks. Checks were used
in more than $40 billion transactions in 2000 but fell to less than $20 billion in 2012. A modest 3% of
consumers surveyed said their preferred way to pay was via check, and the majority of those were older
consumers. The annual rate of decline in check transactions from 2009-2012 was 9.2%, compared to an
annual growth of credit card transactions at 7.6% in the same years.
CREDIT & DEBIT CARDS ARE INCREASING
Cash was once king; but in recent years, the traditional paper payment has taken a back seat.
Consumer choice is leaning towards electronic over paper payments due to convenience and speed
- a shift driven by the onslaught of mobile payments and increased popularity of online shopping.
On average, the global preference for cards (credit, debit, and prepaid) is 54%, compared to 39% for
cash. Nowadays, there are enticing incentives for a consumer to sign up for a credit card: travel points,
rewards, cash back, exclusive offers, and the list goes on. Since credit cards are accepted at a majority of
stores worldwide, consumer convenience is another reason for the increased popularity. At the end of
2013, there were over 8 billion credit, debit, and prepaid cards in circulation. Accepting credit cards is
no longer a perk; it’s a necessity.
MOBILE WALLETS ARE ON
THE MOVE
Where mobile apps were once a novelty, now
“there’s an app for that”. The proliferation
of mobile apps in modern culture is almost
excessive (each of the Kardashians has their
own). Nevertheless, it adequately describes
the shift that is occurring: mobile apps are
everywhere we turn. Today’s consumers are
spending over 85% of their time on their
smartphones using mobile apps. What that
means for the payments industry is that mobile
wallets are gaining, and will continue to gain in
popularity.
In the minimalist mentality of less is more,
mobile wallets have become increasingly
prevalent. Smartphones and other devices
act like a contactless wallet; users can add
credit cards to mobile wallets such as Apple
Pay, Samsung Pay, Android Pay, and Google
Wallet to replace them with a virtual card
and pay with a simple tap, via NFC (near-field
communication) technology. Mobile wallets
will only continue to grow in ubiquity with
technology giant Apple joining the game. Of
consumers who currently do not use mobile
wallets, 62% expect to use the technology
within the next year. The proliferation of NFC
and the advancements of technology mean
that any device can be turned into a secure
form of payment: Apple Watch even lets you
pay with a simple tap of your wrist.
With credit card payments, you don’t waste time waiting for paperbased invoices, tracking down NSF checks, and waiting for checks
to clear the banks (which can take up to 90 days). When you accept
credit cards, funds are generally deposited within 48 hours.
Billing and labour overhead, such as paper, printer, and postage
use, is reduced when you abolish hard copy invoices. On average,
to process a check requires a high operational cost of $7.36. A Visa
report revealed that for each $1000 transaction, the cost of dealing
with NSF checks is $20 for small businesses and $24 for medium/
large businesses
Processing cash and checks not only requires more money but also
takes more time. Time wasted with trips to the bank, managing
accounts receivables, and chasing checks. When you accept credit
cards, the process is automated.
Customers are more inclined to spend larger amounts and buy
more impulsively with credit cards. Not only is it faster, but the
psychological pain of paying is lessened because swiping a credit
card is more abstract than handing over cash. Industry research
indicates that credit cards increase revenue by at least 30%.
Accepting credit cards is more secure than cash because sensitive
data is safely encrypted and transmitted
When you display the credit cards you accept, your brand is
associated with those recognizable and reputable banks in the
minds of your customers. 
By accepting credit cards, you can embrace eCommerce and sell
your goods and services online; the world is your market
If your business is accepting credit cards, customers have no reason
to go to your competitors for a more efficient shopping experience.
Moreover, you can take business away from the competition still
dealing in a cash and check only world
Name - Acquirer
(alias: Acquiring Bank or Merchant Bank)
Job - An acquirer takes on the risk of credit card processing.
The acquirer solicits, underwrites, and maintains the merchant
account. They may provide the technology, and hardware which
enables the merchant to process the transaction.
Examples - Chase, First Data.
Name - Aggregator
Job - Aggregators allow merchants to process payments
without setting up a merchant account. They bundle several
merchants together and allow them to process payments
using a joint merchant account. The set-up is simple and
straightforward.
AGGREGATOR Examples - Square, PayPal.
Name - Cardholders
Job - Cardholders are consumers with credit cards used to
purchase goods and services. They are approved by the issuing
bank based on credit worthiness.
Examples - Beyonce, John Smith.
Name - Issuing Bank
(alias: Issuer)
Job - The issuing bank issues credit cards on behalf of payment
brands. They provide consumers with credit cards, send credit
card statements, and offer consumers credit. The issuer is also
responsible for card security and compensates customers for
losses due to fraud.
Examples - Royal Bank, Bank of America.
Name - Merchants
Job - Merchants are business owners accepting payments in
exchange for goods or services.
Examples - Best Buy, Bob’s Cafe.
Name - Payment Brand Networks
(alias: Credit Card Associations, Card Brand, or Payment Brand)
Job - Payment brand networks are colloquially known as
credit card and debit card companies. Their job is to govern
compliance policies pertaining to their payment cards, monitor
processing activity, develop new products, and oversee the
clearing and settlement of transactions.
Examples - Visa, MasterCard.
Name - Payment Processors (alias: ISO, Independent Service
Organization, or Merchant Account Providers).
Job - Payment processors negotiate processing, setup, and
equipment rates, as well as set up the merchant account. They
act as a middleman between merchants and acquirers. They
may also provide the technology and hardware which enables
the merchant to process the transaction.
Examples - Payfirma, Moneris, Elavon.
THE PATH OF A TRANSACTION
AUTHORIZATION
Authorization is the process of approving or declining a transaction before a purchase can be
completed. When consumers purchase something, the card is swiped, inserted, or entered (in the case
of eCommerce), and the transaction is either approved or declined immediately. But on the back end, it
is far more complex.
Authorization Process
The cardholder gives the merchant their credit card for payment. The merchant terminal reads the
card information encoded on the magnetic strip or chip.
The merchant terminal then passes the information and transaction amount to the payment
processor.
The payment processor encrypts the information into an authorization request and sends it to the
payment brand.
The payment brand then routes the authorization request to the issuing bank for review.
The issuing bank will approve or decline the transaction by verifying whether the card is legitimate,
is reported lost or stolen, and has enough funds available in the account. The issuing bank then
creates an authorization message and sends the information back to the payment brand.
The payment brand, in turn, sends the authorization response back to the processor.
The processor transmits the information to the merchant terminal.
The merchant concludes the sale with the customer.
And it all happens within seconds.
For eCommerce, once the consumer enters their card information for payment, the processor passes
the information onto the payment brand through a secure gateway
CLEARING
Clearing is the process where the transaction data is sent to the acquirer. There are two types of
clearing. The first is dual-message which usually requires a cardholder signature authentication. Each
authorization creates a record called electronic draft capture (EDC) and is lumped into batches to be
processed and submitted for settlement.
The second type of clearing, single-message, requires a PIN authentication. Single-message
clearing occurs simultaneously with the authorization process; the information needed to post the
transaction to the cardholder’s account is sent at the time the transaction takes place. It happens
immediately rather than later, as is the case with dual-message clearing.
SETTLEMENT
Settlement is an exchange of funds between a card issuer and an acquiring bank to complete a
cleared transaction. It is essentially when merchants are funded and when cardholders are charged.
All debits (purchases for consumers and chargebacks/refunds for merchants) and credits (refunds
for consumers and sales for consumers) are calculated and then the net charge appears on the
cardholder’s statement or in the case of merchants, net funds are deposited.
Clearing and settlement process
1. Transaction data is sent to the acquirer.
2. The acquirer credits the merchant’s account and submits the transaction to the credit card brand
for settlement.
3. The card brand facilitates settlement by paying the acquirer and debits the issuer.
4. The issuer then posts the transaction to the cardholder account, which will show up in the
cardholder’s monthly statement.
5. The cardholder receives the statement and pays the bill.
TYPES OF TRANSACTIONS
All credit card transactions can be bucketed under two types:
Card present: occurs when the card is physically present at the time of purchase, such as in-store
purchases where the chip and pin, magnetic stripe, or the tap/NFC feature of the payment card is
being used.
Card not present: occurs when a card is not present during purchase and manually entered instead,
such as phone-in orders or eCommerce transactions.
CHARGEBACKS
Chargebacks are transaction disputes and occur when a customer is unsatisfied with a service or
product or feels the transaction is fraudulent, and goes directly to the credit card company to request
a refund. Chargebacks protect consumers in the event of fraud, customer disputes, or technical errors
(e.g. double charge). However, CBS reports that 86% of chargebacks are fraudulent. For example, a
customer falsely reporting that a package was never received is considered a fraudulent chargeback.
Merchants can dispute unjust chargebacks with the aid of their processor, but that requires time
and money. Chargebacks are detrimental to your business because the product or service is lost, the
transaction fee is often not refunded, and there is the possibility that you may be fined a larger fee.
Chargebacks can lead to unnecessary churn (cancellations) and can be reduced if you follow these
five tips.
In one corner, we have aggregators, who
allow merchants to accept payments
without applying for a merchant account.
Aggregators group several merchants
together in an aggregation (hence
the name) and allow them to process
payments using one joint merchant
account. Well-known aggregators are
Square, Stripe, and PayPal. 
In the other corner, we have merchant
account providers. They provide you with
your own merchant account, help ensure
that you are PCI-compliant, and may
provide the hardware to accept payments.
Well-known merchant account providers
are Payfirma, Global Payments, and
First Data.
Increased likelihood of account holds
By removing entry barriers and allowing instant credit card processing, aggregators take on more
risk. Aggregators assume the risk for fraud of all the merchants under their umbrella. So to offset
the risk, they exercise extreme caution when the slightest “irregular” activity is suspected - which
is fairly common. This means that they won’t be shy about freezing accounts without notice. Since
aggregators removed the lengthy application process, they are not aware of unique business
information like your typical processing amounts, so they will put your account and funding on hold to
do their due diligence when something seems out of the norm. Sometimes the holds are only minor
inconveniences (24-48 hours); but in other cases, they can be 30 days long; and in extreme cases, the
account can be shut down.
Higher fees
By allowing a large number of merchants to process instantly and easily, aggregators increase their
own risk. Fraudulent activity is higher in aggregators than true merchant accounts. The higher risk
correlates with higher fees. Aggregator fees are almost always fixed - no matter how much you process.
This means the more you process, the more fees you incur.
Lower limits
Aggregators have their own fees; they are charged based on gross processing volume, which means
that your processing limits are lower than they would be with a merchant account. In addition, if you
exceed the limit, you may be subject to holds and higher processing fees on subsequent transactions.
Branding
With aggregators such as PayPal and Square, their company name may appear with your business
name on credit card statements, which creates inconsistent branding.
PCI Compliance
Technically, aggregators are not banks so they are not necessarily required to follow strict banking
regulations or be PCI-compliant. 
Longer application and approval process
While the approval process with aggregators is instant, the process to sign up for a merchant account
is lengthier because to mitigate risk, acquiring banks require a comprehensive understanding of your
business to determine your eligibility for a merchant account. Because acquirers have the potential
to lose money every time they process a credit card transaction on behalf of your business, they don’t
hand out accounts to just anyone. Approval is dependent on factors like the risk associated with your
business according to industry standards.
A Plethora of fees
Where aggregators often have simple, fixed fees, merchant account providers have a variety of pricing
structures which can seem confusing if not communicated clearly. (See Chapter 04)
More expensive… up to a point
There can be monthly fees and contracts with merchant account providers. For smaller businesses,
those additional fees may not make sense if the business isn’t processing much in the way of credit card
payments. However, once you start processing more than $40,000, you hit a ceiling where processing
with your own merchant account will actually save you money because fees are tailored to your unique
business and more competitive. With tailored fees, pricing is optimized based on your individual
business (such as high and low average transaction sizes).
AGGREGATORS
ARE REACTIVE
Aggregators take on the risk of all
their merchants so they’re extra
vigilant about potentially fraudulent
activity. Aggregators are reactive
because they don’t obtain your
processing information beforehand; they
respond accordingly to your processing
activity as it happens. They can freeze your
account and hold your funds if there is
suspicious activity to assess the situation
MERCHANT ACCOUNTS
ARE PREVENTIVE
Merchant account providers are
preventive because they gather
information about your processing
amounts and frequencies during the
application process. This means that
you have little to no processing disruptions
because your payment processor knows
what is considered regular activity and what
irregular activity to look out for.
FEES
Fees are calculated per transaction, and are aregenerally between 1% and 4%. There is also often a fixed
dollar amount per transaction that ranges between $0.10 and $0.30. Below is an exhaustive list of the
common fees that are charged, but keep in mind that not all payment processors will charge every fee.
NON-NEGOTIABLE FEES DESCRIPTION
Interchange Fee The interchange fee is what the acquiring bank pays to the
issuing bank and is commonly referred to as "cost". This fee is set
by the card brands and is non-negotiable. The interchange fee
is higher for non-qualified cards than it is for qualified (basic)
cards, and varies for the different card levels.
Card Brand Cost/Fee
(AKA Card Assessment
Fee)
This is a small fee that is non-negotiable and is paid to Visa,
MasterCard, etc., for each transaction. It does not matter
whether the card is premium or basic, present or not-present.
It's a flat fee per transaction. Payment processors can choose to
mark this up or not.
International Fee This fee is applied when an international card is used for a
transaction and is a non-negotiable fee. Payment processors can
choose to mark this up or not.
Chargeback Fee A chargeback fee is a set fee for handling disputed transactions
either due to fraud or faulty goods/services. Different
processors/acquirers will price chargebacks differently. There is
no set industry fee associated with chargebacks.
Discount Rate (AKA
Qualified Rate or
Merchant Discount
Rate)
The discount rate is a percentage that a merchant must pay to
process a transaction where a qualified (basic) card is used. It is
mostly made up of the non-negotiable interchange fee which
is set by the card brands, plus a small mark-up amount which is
set by the payment processor. A qualified card is the most basic
credit card that has no perks, no benefits, and no points. And to
qualify for the Discount Rate, the qualified card must be present
during the purchase. The discount rate is calculated on a per
transaction basis and is a percentage of the total transaction
size. This is a negotiable rate.
Non-Qualified Rate A non-qualified fee is added on top of the discount rate. It is
a bundled fee associated with non-standard consumer cards
(ie. Rewards cards, business cards, corporate cards, etc.) as
well as cards that are not present for the transaction. This is a
negotiable rate.
Interchange Differential
Fee
The interchange differential fee is the difference between the
base interchange rate of a card brand (standard credit card with
no rewards, perks or benefits) and the actual interchange rate
of the card. This is a separate fee that is added on top of the
interchange fee.
Transaction Fee A set network (ie. Interac, Visa, MasterCard, Amex, Discover) fee
added to each transaction.
PCI Compliance A fee associated with being PCI-compliant. Payment processors
incur costs associated with being PCI-compliant and will often
transfer those costs on to merchants in the form of monthly,
quarterly, or annual fees.
Statement Fees A fee associated with preparing statements. Some processors
will charge for this service.
Monthly Minimum Fees This varies by processor but is charged to ensure the minimum
fees associated with the required processing volume are met.
For example, if your minimum fees are $20/month, and your
actual processing volume only amounted to fees of $11, you will
be charged the difference of $9.
Annual Fees Some processors will charge annual fees. These are often fees
associated with PCI compliance.
Set-Up Fees Some processors will charge a set-up or "application" fee. These
fees will vary by processor and are negotiable.
Cancellation Fees It varies by processor, but is a fee charged when some services
are discontinued prior to contract end. This is negotiable.
Interchange
Differential
With this pricing model,
you pay the qualified rate,
the non-qualified fee, if
it’s anything other than a
basic card, the card brand
fee, and the interchange
differential fee.
Tiered
In this pricing model, you
pay based on which tiers
the transaction falls into.
There are three tiers:
• Qualified (swiped
 transactions),
• Mid-qualified
 (keyed-in transactions),
• Non-qualified
 (online transactions).
With tiered pricing, fees
are bundled within the
tiers, and the true cost of
each fee of a transaction is
not disclosed.
Billback / ERR
(Enhanced Recover
Reduced)
This pricing model
consists of a flat rate
and a second charge for
all non-qualified cards.
Essentially, a merchant
pays the qualified rate on
the first statement then
is billed back for nonqualified cards; the second
charge always shows up in
the next statement. Since
this pricing structure is
a lump sum, it is hard to
break down the cost of a
transaction.
Interchange Plus /
Cost Plus
For the interchange plus
pricing model, you pay
the interchange rate
of the card plus a fixed
percentage, which can be a
mixture of additional fees.
This is known to be the
most transparent pricing
structure.
Flat
Pricing models can be
difficult to grasp, which is
why some providers, such
as aggregators like Square,
offer a flat rate pricing
model. No matter the type
of card and transaction,
you will always pay a fixed
percentage. The downside
of this pricing structure is
the cost; when you process
larger amounts, you end
up paying a substantial
amount in fees.
PCI COMPLIANCE
Along with payment card industry growth
comes a surge in technology crimes, which leads
to stricter, more complex standards. PCI DSS
(Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard)
was put into place by the Security Standards
Council, comprised of the five major credit card
companies: Visa, MasterCard, Amex, Discover, and
JCB. PCI Compliance is a set of 12 requirements
that ensure a safe environment to process credit
card payments:
1. Install and maintain a firewall configuration to protect cardholder data.
2. Do not use vendor-supplied defaults for system passwords and other security parameters.
3. Protect stored cardholder data.
4. Encrypt transmission of cardholder data across open, public networks.
5. Protect all systems against malware and regularly update anti-virus software or programs.
6. Develop and maintain secure systems and applications.
7. Restrict access to cardholder data by business need to know.
8. Identify and authenticate access to system components.
9. Restrict physical access to cardholder data.
10. Track and monitor all access to network resources and cardholder data.
11. Regularly test security systems and processes.
12. Maintain a policy that addresses information security for all personnel.
Compliance is enforced by the card brands. All merchants must comply or else face fees, penalties, or
account termination. Constant security checks are required to ensure that risks are identified and fixed. 
Acquirer: An acquirer solicits, underwrites, and maintains the merchant account. They may provide the
technology that allows the merchants to process transactions, take on chargeback risk of a business, and deposit
funds into a merchant’s bank account.
Aggregator: A service provider through which merchants can process their payment transactions without a
merchant account.
Annual Fee: This fee is often associated with PCI compliance.
Application Fee: This is another one-time fee charged for processing the application.
Authorization: The process by which a transaction is approved or declined by the issuer. Merchants use this to
ensure a customer has sufficient funds available on their credit limit at the time the request is being made.
Billback Pricing Model: A pricing model where a merchant pays one set rate for qualified cards then is billed
another rate for all non-qualified cards in the next statement.
Bitcoin: A popular form of cryptocurrency that is created and held digitally.
Cancellation Fee: This is a fee charged when some services are discontinued prior to contract end.
Card Brand Fee: This is a small fee that is paid to Visa and MasterCard each transaction
Card Not Present: Transactions where the credit card is not present at the time of purchase, such as online
purchases. Credit card data is manually entered instead of swiped.
Card Present: Transactions where the credit card is present at the time of purchase, such as in-store purchases.
Cardholders: Consumers with credit cards that purchase goods.
Card Phishing: Scammers posing as a legitimate organization to obtain sensitive customer information.
Card Skimming: The theft of payment card information used in an otherwise legitimate transaction. The thief
can procure card numbers using manual (photocopying receipts) or electronic (using a device to swipe and store
numbers) methods.
Chargebacks: A return of funds to a consumer after they disputed a transaction, either due to fraud or faulty
goods/services.
Chargeback Fee: A chargeback fee is a set fee for handling disputed transactions either due to fraud or faulty
goods/services.
Check: An order for the transfer of money.
Churn: The rate that you are losing customers.
Payment Processing 101
51
Clearing: Activity from the time a commitment is made for a transaction until it is settled. Clearing turns the
promise of payment into an actual movement of money from one bank to another.
Cost Plus Pricing Model: See Interchange Plus Pricing Model.
Credit Card: A plastic card with a credit limit used to purchase goods and services.
Credit Card Fraud: Theft and fraud committed using or involving a credit and debit card. It is either theft of the
actual card or sensitive card information and then the use of either without the knowledge of the cardholder.
Cryptocurrency: A digital currency in which encryption techniques are used to regulate the generation of units
of currency and verify the transfer of funds, operating independently of a central bank.
CVV: Card Verification Value is a unique 3 or 4 digit number found on the back of a credit or debit card. It provides
an extra layer of security to minimize unauthorized transactions.
Debit Card: A plastic payment card that provides the cardholder electronic access to their bank account.
Discount Rate (or Merchant Discount Rate): The fee charged by your credit card processor and paid to a
merchant bank in exchange for being able to accept credit cards. It is calculated on a per transaction basis and
based upon the total amount of the transaction size.
eCommerce: Trading in products or services using computer networks, such as the Internet.
EMV (Europay, MasterCard, and Visa): Otherwise known as chip and pin. It is a global standard for credit and
debit card payments based on chip card technology.
ERR: Stands for Enhanced Recover Reduced. See Billback Pricing Model.
Flat Fee: A pricing model that has a fixed fee regardless of card type, business type, and transaction type. This is
the fee type for aggregators.
Fraud: When a customer does not initiate or has no knowledge of the transaction.
Interchange: Interchange is what the acquiring bank pays to the issuing bank. Each type of credit card has a
different interchange rate set by the card brands.
Interchange Differential Pricing Model: With this pricing model, you pay the qualified rate, the non-qualified
fee, if it’s anything other than a basic card, the card brand fee, and the interchange differential fee.
Interchange Differential Fee: The interchange differential fee is the difference between the interchange rate of a
premium or non-qualified card (i.e. cash back credit card) and the interchange rate of a qualified card.
Interchange Plus Pricing Model: A pricing model that consists of the interchange rate of the card plus a fixed
percentage.
International Fee: This fee is applied when an international card is used for a transaction.
ISO (Independent Service Organization): Also known as payment processors. They solicit businesses for
merchant services. They work with an Acquirer who facilitates the settlement of transactions into the merchant
account. ISOs set up the merchant account and negotiate fees.
Payment Processing 101
52
Issuing Bank (Issuer): A bank or financial institution that provides credit and a physical credit card to the
customer. They are responsible for approving and declining transactions, billing, and collecting the owed funds
from the customer.
Line Busting: Abolishing line-ups.
Merchant: A company accepting payment cards in exchange for goods or services.
Merchant Account: A type of bank account that allows businesses to accept payments by payment cards,
typically debit or credit cards. It is established under an agreement between an acceptor and a merchant
acquiring bank for the settlement of payment card transactions.
Mobile Payments: Payments accepted on a mobile device or a payment made on a mobile device.
Mobile Wallet: An electronic device that allows an individual to make electronic transactions.
Monthly Minimum Fee: A fee that is charged if a certain transaction total for the month or year is not reached.
Multichannel: Providing customers multiple payment channels to choose from.
NFC (Near Field Communication): The technology that allows the transfer of information when two enabled
devices are in close proximity through radio waves.
Non-qualified: Any card that is not a standard no perks, no benefits card that is present when and where the
transaction takes place.
Non-qualified Fee: This is a bundled fee associated with non-standard consumer cards and cards that are not
present for the transaction.
Omni-channel: Omni-channel refers to providing a holistic experience for the many ways consumers interact
with you. For payments, this means providing multiple integrated methods for your customers to pay.
Payment Brand Networks: Credit card and debit card companies. Their role is to govern compliance policies
pertaining to the bank cards, monitor processing activity, develop new products, and oversee the clearing and
settlement of transactions. Examples are Visa and MasterCard.
Payment Gateway: It facilitates the transfer of information between a payment portal (website, mobile phone)
and the processor (Payfirma).
Payment Processor: Organizations that partner with an acquirer to open merchant accounts, handle support,
manage payment processing, and build technology on behalf of acquirers.
PCI DSS (Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard) or PCI Compliance: A set of requirements that
ensure all merchants that come into credit card information maintain a secure environment.
PCI (Payment Card Industry) Fee: The PCI fee is paid to the Payment Card Industry, either for non-compliance or
compliance.
Payment Processing 101
53
POS (Point of Sale): The location where payment is accepted. This is often referred to as checkout.
Qualified: A baseline credit card that is a standard, no perks, no benefits card that is present when and where the
transaction takes place.
Recurring Billing (subscription billing): Automatic and periodic payment under a pre-authorized agreement for
an ongoing product or service.
Refund: A credit issued by the merchant back to a customer when a customer returns a product.
Reporting: Analytics and statistics on your payment information.
Set-up Fee: This is a one-time fee charged for the set-up of a specific product or service like an eCommerce setup fee.
Settlement: An exchange of funds between a card issuer and an acquiring bank to complete a cleared
transaction
Statement: A fee associated with preparing statements.
Subscription Billing: see recurring billing.
Tablet POS: A completely functional POS system on a tablet.
Tiered: A pricing model in which the rates are structured in tiers. You pay different rates for different types of
cards.
Traditional Terminal: A physical wired or wireless terminal that allows you to accept debit and credit card
payments.
Transactions Fee: This fee is charged for every credit card transaction.
Virtual Terminal: A virtual terminal that acts like a POS system by allowing you to accept credit cards through
your web browser.
Web Terminal: See Virtual Terminal.