PayFac Dynamic Payout Daily Operations
Guide
This document is intended for use by operations and financial professionals to assist with day-to-day monitoring
and management of the Worldpay Dynamic Payout funding model. Use this document after completing your
integration and certification testing and have started processing live transactions.
To complete the daily steps outlined in this guide, you’ll use the following Worldpay eCommerce products and
tools:
• Scheduled Secure Reports (SSR) Service - an automated service designed to create one or more
predefined reports and make them available in your merchant FTP account for retrieval.
• eCommerce iQ Merchant Reporting and Analytics - a simple to use, web-based interface that allows you
to access a wide variety of financial data and reports for transactions processed through Worldpay.
• cnpAPI - the data format used for payment processing with Worldpay, as well as funds distribution via
Dynamic Payout.
For comprehensive information about the features and services mentioned in this guide, see the following
Worldpay eCommerce technical documents:
• Worldpay eComm Scheduled Secure Reports Reference Guide
• Worldpay eComm iQ Reporting and Analytics User Guide
• Worldpay eComm cnpAPI Reference Guide
• Worldpay eComm PayFac API Reference Guide
• Worldpay eComm Dynamic Payout Information
• Worldpay eComm Dynamic Payout FAQs
• Worldpay eComm Dynamic Payout Same Day Funding FAQs
About Dynamic Payout
Dynamic Payout is a solution platform that controls the distribution of funds using flexible, customized instructions
defined by the developer. The solution provides a closed-loop transaction life cycle from payment to payout.
Putting the developer in control, payout is dependent upon submitting instructions each time a payout is required.
Dynamic Payout requires that a balance covering the amount of each instruction be available in the developer’s
FBO account. A developer can submit instructions as long as funds are available to meet the request. This means
that it is not necessary to wait for the previous day’s transaction activity to be deposited as long as there is a
reserve in the FBO account.
Dynamic Payout funds merchants via the ACH network or Debit rails. With Dynamic Payout, merchants are
boarded under the Payment Facilitator hierarchy and payment transactions are sent to Worldpay. Rather than
funds being directly settled to the Payment Facilitator’s merchants for the full previous business day activity
amount, funds from settled transactions accumulate in an FBO (For Benefit Of) account.
Developers distribute funds to merchants by submitting a Batch file or calling an API containing Funds Transfer
Instructions. Instructions are based upon payout agreements between Payment Facilitator and their merchants
(daily, weekly, monthly, etc.). Worldpay processes the instructions and moves the funds from the holding account
to the merchants. Funding can take place as early as the next day after settlement, and within minutes of sending
in the instruction.
The structure of Dynamic Payout Funding Instructions via Online transactions is identical to the Batch version,
except the parent is cnpOnlineRequest instead of batchRequest. Additionally, the cnpOnlineRequest
element includes an attribute, sameDayFunding, that allows you to execute the Funding Instruction for same day
settlement. When you set this attribute to true, the funds settle to the destination account on the same day,
subject to certain restrictions (see Same Day Funding on page 5).
Bank Balance: Balance of funds actually settled into the FBO Settlement Account. This is reflected in the SSR
Dynamic Payout FBO Balance Report.
Available Balance: Balance of funds available to use towards sending funding instructions. This balance is a real
time balance that is reflected in the SSR Dynamic Payout Current Account Balance Report.
Bank Rejects/Returns: When a Funding Instruction (ACH) is returned or rejected by either sending or receiving
bank. Corresponding funding instructions are be reversed with new transaction.
Activity Date: The date in which the transaction was sent to the network (VI/MC/DI/AX) or financial institution
(EC/Funding Instructions).
Bank Settlement Date: Bank business day that funds settle into affected bank account.
Available Date: The day funds are counted towards the available balance.
FBO Settlement Account: Bank account where payment processing funds settle to and all funding instructions
are initiated through.
Reserve Account: This is the bank account that a Payment Facilitator can use to hold reserves on their
merchants. Money moves in and out of this account only through the use of Funding Instruction Credits and
Debits.
Check Payment Account: Bank Account that you can move money into and out of using FICC and FICD.
Approved third party vendors such as Bill.com use this account to pull funds to cut and mail paper checks.
Amex Account:
This tracks the amount Worldpay has advanced to you in the case of American Express conveyed if you are a
Payment Facilitator for whom Worldpay conveys Amex transactions (no servicing or settlement) and who uses our
Dynamic Payout product to settle funds to your sub-merchants. In these cases, the Payment Facilitator, via a
Bank Assignment Letter provided to Amex, instructs Amex to deposit settled funds to Worldpay. In turn, the
Payment Facilitator agrees to disburse those funds, less their fees, to the sub-merchant using out Dynamic
Payout product.
As Worldpay receives the funds from Amex, we make it available to you same-day in your Projected and
Available FBO Settlement Balance. Once confirmed by the bank the next business day, it is also attributed to your
FBO Settlement Account.
NOTE: The pre-funding feature for Amex conveyed merchants is deprecated and no longer offered
to new merchants. Contact your Partner Relationship Manager for additional information.
PayFac Dynamic Payout Daily Operations Guide
© 2020 FIS and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
Document Version 2.6
14
Scheduled Secure Reports (SSR)
In addition to the required PayFac reports listed in the Determine the Correct Pay-Out Amounts step, there are
many reports available via SSR that you can use to track transactional data, chargebacks, and to assist in
reconciliation operations. Some of these reports are:
• Net Settled Sales by Transaction Report - includes all settled and conveyed transactions (deposits and
refunds), including Direct Debit transactions. The report can be scheduled based upon either Activity (post) or
Settlement (funds transfer) day. For Enterprise (ISO 8583/610/Express), this is handled by the eMAF file.
• Session Report - includes all transactions for a particular activity post day and allows reconciliation against
submitted transactions. This report is run daily and is used primarily for transaction reconciliation.
• Transaction Summary Report - contains the summarized deposits and refunds submitted by the merchant
for both settled and conveyed methods of payment, broken down by purchase currency. This report is run
daily.
• Activity Report - includes summarized financial data for transactions (deposits and refunds) based upon
activity post date and broken down by Reporting Group and payment type. The report is produced either daily
or for the previous calendar month.
• Settlement Report - includes summarized financial data for settled transactions (deposits and refunds)
based upon settlement (funds transfer) date and broken down by Reporting Group and payment type. The
report is produced either daily or for the previous calendar month.
• Chargeback Financial Report - includes detailed information about financial impacting chargeback activities
for a given activity (post) or fund transfer (settlement) date. This report is run daily. For Enterprise (ISO
8583/610/Express), this is handled by the CHARTS file.
• Chargeback Status Report - provides details of all chargeback activities for a designated activity (post day)
date or date range in the case of a monthly report. This report is run daily or monthly.
• Fee Report - provides a detailed breakdown of all Worldpay and Passthrough (Interchange) fees associated
with transactions. The report can be scheduled based upon either activity (post) or settlement (funds transfer)
day. The report is produced either daily or for the previous calendar month.
• eCheck NoC Report - provides updated account information for your use in updating your customer files,
including bank routing numbers, account numbers, and account names. The report is produced daily and only
applies to merchants processing Direct Debits.
About the Dynamic Payout Current Account Balance Report
Use the Dynamic Payout Current Account Balance Report to get your available balance per FBO, including
FastAccess funding, inter-day draw-down Funding Instructions submitted but not yet cleared. The report SSR
provides current balance information; no unnecessary math! No need to work hard to keep track of your inter-day
available balance, this new SSR takes out the guesswork.
Different from the existing Account Balance Report, this new SSR takes into account all Funding Instruction
transactions that have occurred after the As Of Date and also provides the Last Updated time for the accounts.
This SSR only includes FBO Accounts that are relevant to your front-end available balance reporting remaining
balances in the settlement account, reserve account, and physical check account for a specific Dynamic Payout
organization.
Frequently Asked Questions
This section contains select common questions related to Dynamic Payout daily operations.
What is the maximum number of instructions I can submit in a single Batch?
In general, you should keep the following recommendations and rules in mind when determining the number of
transactions you submit in an Session/Batch file:
• A Batch should not exceed 20,000 transactions. If the number of transaction for a single merchant exceeds
20,000, you should create multiple batches for the same merchant, each batch containing not more than
20,000 transactions.
• A Batch should not contain only one transaction, unless the merchant has only one transaction for the day.
• A Session file must never contain more than 9,999 Batches.
• A Session file must never contain more than 1,000,000 transactions across all Batches.
• Always allow sufficient time between your submission time and your cut-off time for the processing of the
Session. Larger files take longer to process.
What happens if either my Settlement account does not have sufficient available balance to
cover the funding instructions or one of the Batches has an over balance issue? Do you reject
the Batch?
No. Worldpay performs a front-end check on each Funding Instruction within a Batch, as well as Online
instructions, verifying sufficient account balances to cover the money movement from each account. If the system
detects insufficient funds in any account impacted by the a funding instruction, Worldpay rejects the individual
Online instruction or any individual instruction from the Batch that would result in a negative balance. The returned
error message provides information about the account lacking funds. For examples of this situation, see Appendix
D of the Worldpay cnpAPI Reference Guide, cnpAPI v12.1 and later.
Do you perform dupe checks on funding instructions?
Dupe checking for funding instructions takes place at the batch level. That is, batches submitted and accepted on
the same day with the same totals and counts will fail dupe checking and be rejected. If you resubmit a previously
rejected batch, it will not fail dupe checking, because the initial submission was not accepted, it is not included in
dupe checking comparisons. If you believe we rejected a batch in error, please contact your Partner Account
Manager, as the dupe check feature can be disabled for a particular batch, if necessary.
NOTE: To avoid possible account balance verification issues, Worldpay recommends you submit debit
transactions first, in a separate Session file from the credit transactions.
Also, keep in mind that the system may not handle transactions within a Batch sequentially. This is likewise
true for Batches within a Session, but we do handle Session files in the order sent. To guarantee sequential
handling of Batch files, you must submit the Batch individually in Session files.
PayFac Dynamic Payout Daily Operations Guide
© 2020 FIS and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
Document Version 2.6
16
Is there a way to void a submitted funding instruction?
You can use the Funding Instruction Void transaction type to void/remove a designated instruction from a
submitted batch of instructions provided the following conditions are met:
• You must be coded to cnpAPI V10.1 or above.
• Submit the Funding Instruction Void transaction prior to your cutoff time.
• The funding instruction you wish to void must be in a Funding Instruction Batch submitted the same day as
the void. This rule also applies to weekends.
For example, if your cutoff time is 6:00 PM and you submit a batch of funding instructions at 2:00 PM, you have
until 6:00 PM to submit <fundingInstructionVoid> transaction(s) to remove one or more of the submitted
funding instructions submitted in the original batch. If you are using same day funding, you must submit a void
prior to 11:00 AM ET.
For additional information about other cnpAPI elements, as well as the structure and submission of Batch files,
please refer to the latest version of the Worldpay cnpAPI Reference Guide.
How do you calculate my available balance when executing funding instructions?
When you submit a set of funding instructions, we calculate your available balance as PayFac Settlement Account
current balance + Reserve Debits (from funding instructions). The total funding instruction credits must be less
than your calculated available balance for us to execute the submitted instructions. See the examples below.
Identify and Resolve Notices of Change (NOCs)
Did any of your sub-merchants bank accounts change?
Review the daily SSR report, NOC Report by ACH Return Date to determine if any bank account or other
information changed. If you discover changes, make the necessary adjustments to your records for use with
future funding instructions.
Notices of Change (NOCs) are account update notices sent automatically through the ACH network by receiving
banks to advise that account data sent in the original transaction is either incorrect or has been changed. Per
NACHA rules, you are required to update the account information on your systems within six (6) banking days or
prior to sending subsequent transactions for the same account, whichever is later.
There are situations where a funding instruction can succeed, but a NOC is also issued. Depending upon the
reason for the NOC, the receiving bank could accept the funding instruction and issue a NOC so you can correct
your records for future instructions.
See Table B-2, "ACH NOC Change Codes" in the Worldpay eCommerce iQ Reporting and Analytics User Guide
for additional information. The daily NOC SSR report include these codes, as does the Transaction Detail and the
Funding Instruction Detail screens in iQ.
Identify and Resolve Rejects
Did any of your merchants refuse (reject) your transfer?
Review your rejected transfers using the SSR Funding Reject Report by ACH Return Date report. This report
shows all returns and rejects from the previous business day and may include rejected instructions from earlier
dates. The report includes the return date, the original date, and the attempted funds transfer date. The return
date is the date the issuing bank processed the funding instruction. The original date is the original date of the
NOTE: If you include a transaction over $100,000, we mark the transactions as same day, but
processing takes place next day. Because you set the sameDayFunding flag to true, we assess fees
for same day funding. To avoid excess fees, do not attempt to use same day funding for these
transactions.
PayFac Dynamic Payout Daily Operations Guide
© 2020 FIS and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
Document Version 2.6
7
transaction (i.e., batch or online transaction post date). The Attempted Funds Transfer Date is the date the bank
attempted to settle funds.
You can also use the Instruction Search tool in iQ (as shown in Figure 1) to find information on funding
instructions processed by Worldpay, including credits and debits for Payment Facilitator, sub-merchant, reserve,
and vendor accounts, and well as physical check credits and debits.
The Instruction Search Results provides a color-coded list based on your search criteria, of all exact, partial, and
mis-matched data points. Instruction Search results also include a trace number – the unique identifier of the
funds transfer assigned by the bank. The Funding Instruction Confirmation SSR report also includes trace
numbers.
To navigate to the associated Instruction Detail Screen, click the Worldpay Payment ID. The Instruction Detail
screens display comprehensive information about the selected funding instruction transaction.
The Batch Detail report in iQ provides a detailed breakdown of transactions contained within a batch and
includes a summary of batches in the top panel as well as a detailed data table below. From the same report
window, you can click a link to navigate to the Batch Detail Screen and then click a link to navigate to the
Instruction Detail Screen for further details on a Dynamic Payout funding instruction.